- [Instructor] Hi, and
welcome back to the programme.
In this video, we're
going to look at classes
and objects and how they are similar
and yet different from dictionary.
We looked at the example
dictionary in the last video,
about a lottery player.
And I mentioned that a
lottery player dictionary
can store some data, but
it can't do anything.
I'm going to quickly go over creating
a lottery player class, and
then I'm going to explain
how they are different
and how they are similar.
Okay, so this is our lottery player class.
Now, a class is essentially a blueprint.
A class tells us what data
every lottery player has,
but we can personalise it.
So, let's go into running this,
and then it will be a lot easier
to explain how things work.
So, let's have a lottery
player, a player variable,
and that's going to be
equal to lottery player,
which is our class
opening closing bracket.
What this does is that this creates
an object from this class.
And when an object is created in Python,
essentially we get a new thing,
and that thing has whatever
properties were defined
in this special method,
which is the init method,
and there are two on this course
in the beginning and two at the end.
So __init__.
And the properties here are defined
as being self.name and self.numbers.
When we create a new
object, that object is self.
So that object gets two
properties, name and numbers.
The name is gonna be Rolf
without the comma at the end,
and the numbers are gonna
be this topple here.
So, okay, let's print player.name
and print player.numbers
for you to believe
that what I'm saying is correct.
So I'm going to do this.
And what you get out is
what you would expect,
Rolf, 5, 9, 12, 3, 1, and 21.
That's the topple of numbers.
So, how is this different
from this lottery player dictionary?
This lottery player
dictionary also has a name
and a set of numbers, and
also it's a bit shorter,
so really, dictionary is better, right?
Well, we looked at in the last video
that the dictionary can't
do stuff on its own data.
So for the dictionary to give
us the sum of its numbers,
we have to do something like
sum(lottery_player_dict['numbers]).
We have to do this, because
the lottery_player_dict itself
cannot give us a total.
It cannot do any
operations on its own data.
But the lottery player can,
because whenever we define
a method inside a class,
we can have access to self.
And self is the thing that contains
the name and the numbers.
So here, we can do
return sum(self.numbers).
And then, now that we have the total,
we can do player.total.
So the key difference is that objects
not only have data in the form of self dot
the variable name, self dot the numbers,
but it can also have actions or methods
associated with it.
So let's go over to the
terminal and run this code.
Surely you know what's coming.
And 51 is the number that comes out.
And throughout all of this,
I know that adding together
the lottery numbers is not
a very useful thing to do,
but this is only for example really.
Okay, so what if we wanted
to have two different lottery players?
We wanted a player one and a player two.
Okay, so here we have player
one being a lottery player,
and player two being
another lottery player.
So two distinct lottery players.
In order to make you believe me
that these two are distinct,
I'm gonna print where the player one
is equal to player two.
Remember, when we do things
with two equal signs,
we are comparing things as
opposed to assigning things.
So when we run this comparison,
we get the keyword False,
because player one and player two
are not the same thing, okay?
They are two different entities
that share the same signature.
For example, player_one.name
and player_two.name are the same.
If we run this again, we get True.
Because in both instances,
self.name is Rolf.
So here's what self means.
Player_one is self.
Player_two is self.
But they are different instances of self.
When we do player_one.name,
what's happening here is
that self is player one.
So what we get is the player one's name.
If we do player_two.name,
what we get is the player two's name.
But they are the same,
so why does it matter
that we can access one or another?
Well, they don't have to be the same.
To the init method, we
can pass a parameter.
And then we can do something like Rolf
for the first one and
John for the next one.
So when we create a new object,
we pass in Rolf to be name.
Self is automatically generated for us,
so we do not have to pass self in.
So Rolf becomes name,
and John becomes name
in a separate execution.
Here's a trick question.
What do you think is gonna come out
when we run this code again?
Remember, what we are printing
is whether player one's name
is equal to player two's name.
Do you think True is gonna come out,
or False is gonna come out?
The answer may surprise you.
True comes outs.
And that is because even
though we've passed Rolf
into this argument and
John into this argument,
self.name, when we
assign it is still Rolf.
So what we have to remember
is to put name in there.
This name is that one.
And self.name, the object's name,
becomes this parameter there.
Then again, the numbers are
always the same as well.
So even though now when
we run this we get False,
because the names no longer are the same,
the numbers are still the same,
because we've not changed them.
So both objects will
have the same numbers.
We can change that though.
We can say player_one.numbers
= (1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8)
for example, and then we can compare
player one numbers to player two numbers,
and we should get False, right?
What do you think's gonna
happen when we press play?
You think we're gonna get an error?
Have we changed the topple?
Are we gonna get True?
Or do you think we cannot
change numbers like that?
What's your gut telling you?
And we get False,
which is what I would expect,
because player one's numbers,
when the object was created,
which is when the init method runs,
player one's numbers were assigned
to be 5, 9, 12, 3, 1, and 21,
but then we replaced that box.
We took everything out of it,
and we put something new in it.
And what we put in it
was 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, and 8.
Remember, we have not changed the topple.
We have just removed it
and put another one in.
And player two still has
the original numbers there,
so the numbers are then
gonna be different,
because player one's numbers are these,
player two's numbers are these,
and then we get False.
Hopefully, that made sense.
In the next video, we're gonna move over
from lottery players into students,
and we're gonna look at how we can create
a student class that has marks,
and then we can add
more marks to a student
and calculate averages
and things like that.
So we offer (mumbles).
I'll see you in the very next video.
And I'm really excited to guide you
through object oriented programming.
I'll see you there.